so welcome everyone I am charl Bida I'm
um I'll be your host today I'm a
postdoctoral researcher at University
Italiana in Lugano Switzerland
and today I have the pleasure to be
animating a conversation between Charles
Bennett and David Deutsch on the nature
of computation incompleteness and
Mathematics
oh please ask everyone who's not David
or Charlie to mute themselves so that we
don't hear any background
any noise in the background
so that means among the Charles that
includes yourself right yeah I'll keep
myself unmuted correct
I'll be animating the the conversation
for um
around one hour and then I'll open it up
for the audience to ask questions and
jump in
well let me introduce our guests to
continue we have Charles Bennett he's an
IBM fellow at the IBM research and a
fellow of the American physical Society
he has been awarded the 2023
breakthrough prize
in fundamental physics for respionary
work on Quantum information
because he's with us I'll have to
the Breakthrough price was in fact
shared between Charlie David Deutsch so
two of our speakers today and Jill Brasa
and Peter Shore
um so we have two of them with us today
um you know so throughout his career
Charlie played an essential role in
investigating and clarifying the roles
between the links between information
and physics
among other things he co-invented
Quantum cryptography he set the basis
for Quantum information theory he
resolved the Maxwell demons Paradox and
he developed logically reversible
computation
Charlie welcome and thanks for being
here
all right good glad that's over yeah
so we also have David Deutsche visiting
I think actually as smokey saw from
actual demon problem and then people
sort of forgot about it for for 50 years
oh okay good yeah thanks for the note
David Deutsche is visiting professor of
physics at Oxford University a fellow of
the Royal Society and The Institute of
physics he has also been awarded the
2023 breakthrough prize and fundamental
physics for his Pioneer work on Quantum
computation
uh David is mostly known for his
discovery of the universal quantum
computer and the first Quantum algorithm
yet he's also a pioneer of Constructor
Theory and he's made significant
contributions to the philosophy of
science David thank you and welcome for
being here welcome and thank you for
being here
thank you
so I'd like to start the conversation by
discussing the theory of computation
computers are all around us
they're your their usefulness and
day-to-day life is now evident
but when it comes to computers and the
theory of computation what
um makes me the most
intrigued is what computation is
fundamentally and physically
and what role does it play in
understanding of the world around us
so Charlie I'll address the first
question to you but eventually hopefully
this becomes a conversation so please
David if at some point you want to jump
in please feel free to react like you
would in a regular living room kind of
conversation
Charlie what is the theory of
computation all about
well I think
it's almost a
you shouldn't ask about the computation
particularly but the the Deep
philosophical question is about the
relation between mathematics
and the the
physics
or meth the way I I
owes the quest the problem of cosmology
is to find a mathematical home
for our
classical phenomenon
so a phenomenon is is this is like a
genome it's the set of phenomena that we
are the world that we inhabit so this is
a both a
it's a problem of mathematics
is a structure which we think is
absolute and and independent of of
anything physical and yet if we the goal
of cosmology or of Science in general is
to
uh
find a mathematical explanation of of
the world in other words uh to find a
part of this vast
structure that is mathematics
within which what we see
is is typical
instead of surprising and puzzling and I
think
that's why I've gotten interested in
cosmology lately because there are some
some
things that uh
seems to be
have been learned by modern cosmology
that make make it
harder to to feel that we've solved this
problem of finding a
a model of the universe within which
within which what we see is is is it is
typical so this is this touches on the
on the question of the distinction
between
what what is and what could be
and also on the
anthropic principle and what what uh
questions that some people have have
asked in terms of of self-locating
uncertainty and it's it also gets into a
question that's very ancient in
mathematics
which is
uh
in in Infinity the nature of infinity so
the the big some big problems in
cosmology I must say I I always go and
ask uh Andreas Albrecht because he's
been thinking about cosmology for for a
much longer time
and uh
in in one of the workshops we we
organized he said well
uh
maybe let's take a an out an hour now
and then and wallow in in in in Prior
probabilities or prior uh
I mean priors say this is a field where
uh you never can solve anything oh
and I I one of the main things I I got
from him was the the uh
the attitude of being as as as uh
unsatisfied with your own ideas as you
are with everybody else's
um
so where was I going with this but uh so
the problem that that I say was
what I think we one way of trying to
approach this is just to to
to think of uh oh as I was saying that
Infinity is very important I think we
can kind of prove that if you have a
uh
finite World in thermal equilibrium you
get a very boring world with uh
it with essentially because of the the
boltzmann brain problem
and so we can get interesting things
uh in an infinite system which we can't
get into finite ones qualitatively
different and
uh within that I would say what I'm
trying to find out is how
uh
how permanent disequilibrium can arise
and how from disequilibrium
uh
complexity in the sense of logical depth
can arise and how in that
in in a system that is doing that a uh
science can arise
and I don't ask about Consciousness
directly because I think it may be
a a
sort of an illusion
uh
so here we have a whole bunch of people
who think they're talking to each other
on the screens or in the room
but uh
and the the big philosophical I guess
they call it the hard problem of
consciousness of trying to decide what
what it means that we feel conscious
uh maybe is is
is
uh
asking too much and it would be easier
to say because our consciousnesses are
not independent of one another
we we if a person is raised without
contact with other people they don't
learn to think the way the way we do
and I know it's not my turn yet but can
I just say it is infinity an illusion
uh
well I think it's it's no I think
Infinity is a method is a mathematical
notion so I but I think that you need
Infinity to get the kind of permanent
disequilibrium that you need to to to
escape the the boltzmann brain problem
you may need it but you may have another
way of doing it so
so uh so in other words I would say that
instead of saying asking questions like
what
is it sort of the copernican principle
so is it unusual that I that I'm alive
at this moment or that my
Observer moments are are typical I would
just say the uh
the
entirety of of uh terrestrial
civilization or the terrestrial uh uh uh
even larger than human civilization this
the terrestrial the complexity of the
terrestrial world is something that we
can look at a little bit more
objectively than saying speaking of
Consciousness and so we can say well
maybe whales are conscious in a
different way
and that's not quite a scientific
question but but I think we need to look
for a mathematical model within which
and I think it has to be infinite but
baby I'm wrong within which
uh
what we see is
is typical under a kind of
anthropic as weak as as weekly as
possibly anthropic selection
um okay and end of speech at least
that's sort of the reason why you're
invoking Infinity because then you could
have fluctuations
well if you have infinitely I'll
yeah I don't if I just have an Infinity
uh
let's say like like uh Boltzmann's idea
which gave rise to the Bolson brain yeah
of just an infinite uh
almost not not even uh this is before
general relativity an infinite uh
Universe at equilibrium then you you get
the boltzmann brain problem you get the
fact that you can't believe anything
that you see
uh because everything happens somewhere
and I think this problem is
is somewhat better understood in in the
in the more modern cosmologies
uh but I was looking at very simple
cellular automata models in which by
making the model in infinite and it's
it's its Dynamics is reversible you get
something that looks like unbounded
complexity that goes on forever but it
only goes on forever because the model
is infinite and uh
it uh therefore it can never it can
never equilibrate and get boring I think
I gotta I've got a picture of it I'll
see if I can find an example of
the model like that here is
okay so this is a reversible cellular
automaton
uh and that time goes horizontally
like that
uh and there's there's three uh
there are three domains here it's one
dimensional automaton so this time
history of it and the these these differ
just by the reversal of black and white
so there's there's no domain boundaries
that that Collide here producing this uh
this complicated thing that just goes on
forever getting more and more
complicated this this uh business up
here is an artifact because I was doing
it with periodic boundary conditions and
this was the wraparound it was beginning
to have affected but if you're doing on
an infinite model it lattice it gets so
this is the sort of thing where you
can't get this in a finite model if you
do it in a in a finite system with local
interactions you get something that's
that's looks more like uh
here I'll just do it at the beginning
here same model yeah so it gets it gets
interesting and then if it if you run
long enough it just it's boring
okay and I'll stop the screen share so
that's that's uh
that's why I think Infinity is important
but that's just maybe I haven't been
familiar enough with cosmology but I
think
the cosmologies I think let's say let's
see what Andy says but but I think that
the the the
the cosmologies tend to be infinite now
uh also I have to stop sharing my screen
where is that
yeah
screen sharing stop there it is good
okay therefore I I was expecting Charlie
to to throw us into cosmology but to be
honest I didn't expect on question one
we would go on to cosmology
thank you Charlie I I enjoyed it David
would you like to react like maybe maybe
you can either react to Charlie's
comments and and how you're very as your
reaction yeah
perhaps you have a you can backtrack the
question and and retake the theory of
company well I think the
um I can I can react and respond to your
question at the same time because I
think the um
uh where I disagree with with Charlie
would be right at the beginning sort of
foundationally oh yeah you remember you
should say the three R's react respond
and refute
right simultaneously to save time yes
um
uh
so I I'm if you ask
what is computation what is computation
in the universe well what what are
computers what is that all about
um if I was answering that question
I would have to have Universal and
universality right in the first sentence
somewhere because I think that's what
it's all about
computation is physical you know I'm
sure we can all agree on that but I
think there is still a hint of the
mathematician's misconception
in Charlie's uh conception of
computations computers uh physics so I
would say that the the the the
computation exists
universality exists
in in a particular property of the
physical universe
um namely that uh the physical Universe
can accommodate machines which
are Universal in the sense that they can
be programmed to mimic any other machine
if they run long enough and have enough
memory and for them to have to run long
enough and have enough memory they have
to be maintained they they they have to
have additional memory added and so
there has to be implicitly
there is a background of
knowledge creation
if if there is to be a sufficiently
powerful computer like turing machine or
something then in the background there
has to be knowledge creation just like
uh I think I first read this in
Charlie's saying like what would happen
if you found a fountain pen on the moon
um then it would it would tell you a
massive amount I'll tell you that you
it'd been settled by people from the
19th century
yes yes most likely and it's very very
unlikely that it Formed spontaneously
and so the most likely explanation for
it would be that there had been a
civilization you could you could infer a
lot about the civilization by as you say
it's a 19th century type civilization
and and uh you could analyze the ink and
therefore see what kind of squids they
had there and and so on uh so
this another thing that this
um illustrates which you didn't mention
is that there's an intimate connection
between emergent simple emergent
properties and simple microscopic
quantities in fact there are laws about
emergent properties
and the laws about Evolution and
knowledge and so on are among the ones
we would use to analyze the origin of
this fountain pen
um so the the uh we we would we would
um
we would gain a lot of knowledge about
microscopic information from
some macroscopic information and
macroscopic laws
um now
um
so I haven't mentioned mathematics no no
and the reason I haven't mentioned
mathematics even though I totally agree
that there's a mathematical world that's
a sort of super infinitely large and
that that world contains all possible
functions and all possible laws and all
possible mathematical objects
uh the vast majority of which we cannot
even describe
the ones we can describe are basically
the ones that are computable by these
machines which are Universal within our
universe
so it's no good trying to explain that
via
what is going to be likely what you are
going to be likely to see because
what is typical what is probable and so
on but those are all determined by the
laws of physics there is no mathematical
notion of probability that applies to
physics
uh unless we have a law of physics
saying so and in some cases we do and in
some cases we don't
uh and
um
even when we do so and where we do have
a probabilistic theory of something
the anthropic principle
alone
doesn't contain any information about
what the laws of physics are I I this is
an argument that I got from Dennis
Sharma
a long time ago when in with his
reaction to Brandon Carter's famous
paper about the anthropic principle the
thing is if you have
if you think of this as
uh how do we fix what the dimensionless
constants are
um or you know
just the the laws themselves you could
think of the laws themselves as being
enumerated like in Solomon off induction
you know so we have all possible laws
and and and so on and you ask what uh
given what we see uh what is the most
likely that is all inapplicable to
fundamental physics
because at least not via the anthropic
principle because if you think of the
set of all or the class or whatever it
is the set of all
um
uh universe is consistent with something
like something consistent with the
fountain pen on the moon or consistent
with what we see or you know whatever
whatever you want to say consistent with
the existence of computers
um
almost all of them are on the very near
the boundary of that set
they are they are almost all of because
the larger the dimension of the set the
more of it is contained in near near its
boundary so if the only reason why we're
here is that we're anthropically
selected then it's overwhelmingly likely
that we're going to die in the next
nanosecond
or picosecond I suppose it depends
where the chaos how fast the chaos is
going to come in on us
and since we haven't that theory is
hereby refuted
so
um
that's that's not the way to get the
answer I think the the way to get an
answer is not to try to derive
microscopic properties that will then
give you the desired emergent properties
it is to think of emergent laws which
among other things will give you
microscopic laws as well as microscopic
initial conditions like the ones that
produced that fountain pen
you see Charlie your your example has
lived with me for decades
and has has changed me deeply
well I was thinking of an ordinary
ballpoint pen said but you've got you've
put it back itself oh it's evolved into
a fountain pen
because of it because of its its deep
significance
the ballpoint pen would just mean you
have a hole in your pocket
astronauts pocket is a likely
explanation
for you David an example of an emergent
law that constrains also the microscopic
laws would be there exists Universal
computers yes
okay would you like maybe to expand a
bit more because you you've contributed
quite significantly to the church during
thesis I think there was
quite a bit of ambiguity of how we
should understand the church during
thesis and now you name the physicality
of the universal computer I right away
see a link maybe it'd be good to expand
a little bit on that especially for the
audience here
okay well I I
this is controversial and I don't think
I did I think it was touring
uh so the way the story is usually told
is that touring girdle
uh church and post
all kind of came up with the same idea
at the same time all proved the same
theorems basically although they had
different points of view and and uh they
didn't none of them copied from each
other they just sort of then although
some of them knew about each other but
they they kind of converged on a
conception
but I think during uh turing's
conception was different
um the other three
all had the mathematician's
misconception
they all thought that they were doing a
piece of mathematics
or as as Roger Penrose would say meta
mathematics theory of proofs
but a touring
uh the way he solved the Hilbert's
decision problem was to think of a
physical model of proof physical model
and and then argue
implicitly explicitly that again is
controversial
that that
argue that that argument is decisive
that is
he he thought he was proving and he
almost did prove that uh no physical
object can
um
uh
so sorry no physical object can escape
being part of the touring Universal
Turing machines uh repertoire
and the universal turing machine is an
idealized physical machine it's really
got nothing to do with mathematics
uh and uh uh and its relationship with
the physical relationship with the rest
of the universe is is what he elucidated
and then he said that that solves the
decision problem because we must regard
the decision problem itself as a
question about the physical world
including mathematicians and so on and
so that's why he used language like
functions that would naturally be
regarded as computable
naturally to I always took that to mean
straightforwardly computable in nature
but when I said that to mathematicians
they howled enrage and said that I'd
misunderstood it well
if I misunderstood it that
misunderstanding turns out to be the
truth
and turing's writings look exactly like
that truth so
um I think he knew
he just wasn't used to talking about
physics he was a mathematicians but but
I think he did not have the
mathematician's misconception
we're all brought up to have it
we have to free ourselves how would you
say what is the mathematician's
misconception
ah well it's it's
[Music]
um
it's it's the idea that well okay for
present company I can put it like this
idea that
integers and The Logical operations like
and or and not
are given to us by God they are the
natural things and if if you can make
some build some structure or form some
conclusion on top of those then you have
proved it
whereas the real truth is that the
integers and the logic logical
connectives and uh classical rules of
inference and all that they are all
um given to us by physics alone
there is there is no
um underlying mathematical substrate
that we can appeal to
if the laws of physics were different
then we could have laws of physics that
didn't mention and or not or integers or
real numbers or you know they could they
could
uh
they could use any mathematical objects
anywhere in in the mathematical world
but they the fact that they don't is a
feature of the laws of physics
so the and
with this
with this misconception comes some other
misconceptions such as for example that
simplicity
is somehow defined independently of the
laws of physics and infinity as well as
I have written
you know Zeno Xeno was puzzled by the
fact that there's an infinite number of
points between here and the other side
of the room and how come that he can go
from one point to another an infinite
how can he can do an infinite number of
things in a finite time well the answer
is that what is finite or infinite
physically
its relationship to mathematical
finiteness or infinite ism is a matter
for the laws of physics to determine and
they happen to say that this particular
infinite infinite thing in classical uh
physics the Continuum can be traversed
uh an infinite number of steps of
traversing it can be finitely performed
so what can be finitely performed or not
or and what conversely what can only be
infinitely performed I.E can't be
performed is mandated by the laws of
physics
and not vice versa so it's physics that
tells us the difference between
find an infinite uh complex and simple
um and also probability which is which
is a sort of scam lodged in the in in
the middle of all these misconceptions
uh that that
the idea that is misconception
a meta misconception it's it's about me
sorry meta misconception oh um no no
that's a good place
but there is simply a misconception that
probability is another one of these
Concepts that we can help ourselves to
and we haven't yet invoked any physics
you know we we would like what we see to
have at least
um 0.83 probability then then we won't
worry that it's strange
and that invocation of probability we we
take to be sort of harmless we we don't
see that there's a rich world of physics
defining what we mean by that
and in in the case of probability unlike
the other things it doesn't even apply
to most of the universe it or the
Multiverse it it it just applies to very
special situations so it's it's uh
there's no excuse for it
let me let me just ask a little bit a
clarification David if I would have been
asked what's the mathematician
misconception in a nutshell I would have
said it's the idea that proof theory is
a branch of mathematics
but proof theory is a branch of physics
ultimately it's it's been it's given
rise to computer science computer
science has its roots into what are
computers computers or physical objects
now the story is you just gave us you
started speaking of natural numbers and
logical connectors
how how can I Bridge those two uh
pictures of the mathematician
misconception
um
well they are the same uh I I think uh
maybe I'm giving a try and then tell me
but it's
because
we typically do proofs with typical
logical connectors and that will give
rise to some somehow our computers so
that we end up abstracting our computers
with those logical connectors and those
integers and that's where you say that
taking this as a way to formalize proof
is basically physical because I'm
already abstracting my physics of the
computation
yes I
I think that's basically what I said I
mean you
I'm not really used to speaking in
mathematical language
so I I speak of it in terms of laws of
physics yeah yeah okay now I was trying
to
statement proof Theory as a brand yeah
so I I think yeah probably Turing never
said this but I'm sure if he was if he
was here now he would agree that proof
theory is a branch of physics yeah
okay
I I have
I I find myself agreeing with almost
everything you said until you started
talking about the mathematical
mathematician's misconception which I
don't think Tori would have agreed with
you about and which I think is actually
a piece of uh of
of
uh officially say um
a dysphemism
it's an idea that you don't like
but you haven't shown that there's
anything false about it in fact I think
touring
thought more about physics than than his
contemporaries but I think he
felt that this the discovery of
universality meant that
the physics of of that we have here
could be simulated by a computer
and the physics that might exist in a
very different world
perhaps one with a different number of
Dimensions or one that's not even uh has
a notion of locality could also be
simulated by a turing machine in other
words I believe he felt the the the he
was very aware of of physics and he but
he didn't think that different
different parts of the Multiverse with
think of the string theory uh uh the
vast number of different supposed things
that can come out of string theory of
which we might be one
uh that they would have a different
mathematics you think you would I think
he believed in the universality of
mathematics and its ability to simulate
physics so that's where I think that
you're even calling it a misconception
is a misconception of what touring
thought and also a a dysphemism rather
than any kind of refutation however
almost everything you said at the
beginning I agreed with I said oh I take
for granted that that the universality
of computation the unsolvability the
holiday problem which is the same thing
is uh of the the the heart of of uh of
what what the notion of computation is
and that the the other thing is that
that I also didn't even say because I I
believe it so strongly is that this this
mathematics this Universal mathematics
of of computation is uh
is capable of of simulating
physics not only the physics that we
have here but if you talk to Andreas if
he's still around here there he is yes
in in
many models of cosmology now imagine
that there are that there are
inaccessible parts of the universe which
are no no less real than ours except
that we'll never hear about them in
which the laws of physics such as the
number of spatial dimensions and the
number of temporal Dimensions if you
want and and and
are extremely different
and in in almost all of them the
universal computers don't exist they
exist physically but they don't exist
there's nobody there to complain about
it or to celebrate it but they're there
they're like the the desert areas of of
of of the universe
uh but all of that could be simulated by
mathematics so I don't think there's a I
don't think there's I don't think there
is a mathematician's misconception
there's just the the uh idea which has
been around since since Galileo that
that whatever physics is is discoverable
by experiment and a modelable by by
mathematics
um
I think that's clearly untrue if by
Universe you mean
the set of all
or potentially the set of all possible
mathematical entities instantiated as
physical objects as you say most of
those would not be
simulatable by a turing machine
no no they all would be simulatable by a
turing machine most of them wouldn't
give rise to the physical possibility of
turing machine in that part of the
universe for example I don't think there
are a lot of Turing machines in the
middle of the Sun
but in the space of all mathematical
objects there are objects which solve
the halting problem
and that such an object cannot be
simulated by a turing machine it can it
might there are there are also kind of
universes where oh yeah yeah yeah I have
yeah this is in other words these these
like the uh the uh cleaning hierarchy
of all of these a higher level of
unsolvable problems what what you the
problems that you can solve if you had
an oracle for the holding problem
uh now I have an uh an idea that I'd
like to run by uh mathematicians such as
yourself uh even these mathematicians
which just as I have been lately over
the last five years seduced by cosmology
and so think oh it must have the answers
to all the things I worried about since
I was five uh let me try to understand
it better so you know you're a
mathematician and you said you've gotten
to be so fascinated with physics all the
answers to all the things I worry about
in mathematics must be in physics
somewhere let me learn some Physics well
anyway
this is an idea that that you probably
know more about as a mathematician but
when I was writing about the uh the uh
uh
the it's Satan's Omega number the
holding probability of a universal
computer with self-deliminating programs
where if you had this number you would
you would have that an oracle for the
holding problem but it would be a a a
painfully slow Oracle in other words in
order to answer any question you would
have to run for Busy Beaver amount of
time
and I said well the this Oracle would be
Universal in this sense that would add
that it would uh
that it would decide all finitely
refutable propositions
in other words for problems such that uh
that you can express them with with one
quantifier
over over the natural numbers in other
words there exists there exists a Time
such that if you if you run this turing
machine for this amount of time it halts
uh and then I speculated
uh that
uh the harder problems like which would
involve two quantifiers are more like
the the twin Prime conjecture
might be
by and large not interesting because not
mathematically interesting because they
they could be decided by uh
a
a stronger but uh
finitely refutable proposition in other
words instead of saying there are
infinitely many twin primes you could
say that the
uh the spacing between twin primes uh
grows
more more rapidly
or more slowly than a certain function
so in other words one of the quantifiers
something that has more than one
quantifier might
turn out to be a a a
consequence of something that has only
one point of fire so what's your feeling
about uh when you say natural in
mathematics maybe these these these
things that are that are harder than the
halting problem are are just kind of
boring because probably most of them
would be quite around it what I mean by
probably I'm invoking your scam of
probability probably most of them would
be decided as cases of the halting
problem
um
I was sure for most of what you've just
said that you were addressing Charles
because I'm certainly not from
mathematician them's fighting words you
know uh oh okay okay well if you have an
idea how to how to um if you have a
tentative answer David go for it but I
also thought about it I I know go ahead
no no I yeah okay very honestly better
than mine I I think that your case I
remember that piece Charlie you wrote in
which you you say that you specifically
spoke about the twin Prime conjecture
but was that naturally carry over to
higher elements of the arithmetic
hierarchy
it I think so because if you're saying
if there's if you if you bound these
quantifiers you can make them go away
and if a bound exists it could be that
there's a proposition that decides the
twin Prime conjecture
by proving a stronger conjecture that is
just of the same form as uh halting
problem yeah and if you're three or four
quantifiers that same thing I believe
the same thing could happen I didn't
think and what if the okay so another
another sort of
possible glitch that I see if the
spacing in the Twin Prime conjecture
scales suppose suppose larger than busy
beaver
then no no algorithm can base oh yeah
yeah it could yeah yeah so that's
exactly it in other words through if you
say unrefutable
yeah that's right yeah certain things of
that sort
ing exists so I guess this is like a
experimental mathematics yeah except you
can't do the experiments but uh it's
just I don't know has anybody thought
about that how do you decide how
plausible it is that uh
that that one of these uh uh higher
level conjectures could be just decided
by approvable oh yes it's it's really a
feudal gesture because it's like if I
had a solution to the holding problem
then maybe I could solve the twin Prime
conjecture without doing any extra work
but that's like uh if my aunt had Wheels
he'd be a trolley car because I don't
have a solution to the holiday problem
yeah but it might also be that you have
a solution to the halting problem and
you still can and you still could yes
yeah so how do you compare the
likelihood of those two things
by likelihood but yeah yeah shut up well
it actually
basically bring perhaps uh we could move
on on the topic of incompleteness and I
think you you bring it on I yeah I've
had a bit of a context maybe to to to to
get people into it but uh incompleteness
was the incompleteness of mathematics
was perhaps we have to start it back to
Hilbert where he was hoping to put into
a single formal oximetic Theory
all of mathematical truths
and and you're there in 1931 and
basically put an end to this Hope by
finding a statement that is true and has
no proof but gear that a statement is
self-referential and it might look like
an exotic kind of statements
um so it's tempting to think that these
kind of statements are an anomaly and
that we can safely ignore them and keep
doing proofs and Mathematics like we
usually would
have before you're just resolved and I
assume most mathematicians live their
life this ways and I don't blame them
but um seeing from an algorithmic
information Theory perspective notably
due to the work of Gregory chaitan one
of your former colleague I believe
Charlie
incompleteness is a much more widespread
and inevitable phenomenon
so for one thing chaitan's result of
incompleteness does not involve
self-referential statements
and also they're they're usually cast in
a way that he comes up with an infinite
family of true but unprovable statements
and and then you say oh I will enlarge
my formal asymmetic Theory to be able to
prove more of those statements but by
doing so you only managed to prove
finitely more but you're still in front
regardless how big your formal lexicity
Theory grows you're always in front of
an Infinity of true yet unprovable
statements these are generally the the
ideas from the algorithmic information
theoretic proofs of incompleteness
so so yeah I think algorithmic
information Theory makes the case for uh
somewhat natural incompleteness becomes
somewhat natural and actually inevitable
Charlie would you like to react or
comment or expand on on the limits of
our formal axiomatic theories notably I
had in mind like maybe
some of how we should behave with
respect to formalismatic theories in the
light of these incompleteness theorems
you know chaitin has suggested maybe we
should acquire new axioms based on their
fertility of the consequences that they
that the problems that they help us
solving and to me there's a striking
similarity now between what theoretical
physicists do where they change or
update their principles uh based on the
problems that we're care to solve so do
you have any remarks to make on on that
line of philosophy of incompleteness
well I'm more of a physicist so of
those the things that I suggested which
is maybe see I really love computational
universality and the and the I couldn't
live because this reminds me of of what
uh
Danny greenberger said about
about
um
quantum mechanics
uh he said
in any God that would know which slip a
particle went through I wouldn't believe
in that God
of the two-slit experiments so I would
say any
anyone who still would would like to
live in a world that Hilbert wanted to
to find
I I wouldn't I wouldn't want to be
friends with that person
in other words I think I think the I
think that the the universality and the
duel to it is the the the incompleteness
is just the way a beautiful feature of
the way world is it's beautiful in
mathematics in the same way that that uh
uh a lot of mechanics is is beautiful in
physics
or general relativity yeah nice thanks
David what is what is your take on
incompleteness and it doesn't have to be
from the algorithmic information
theoretic perspective just what what are
your thoughts well I I I would agree
with what Charlie just said it it's it's
um the world that that Hilbert envisaged
is a world without creativity it is and
uh probably ultimately if if you if you
take sort of our world and and hobble it
down to that level life could never have
evolved so ours is is a world in which
uh life can evolve because there's
incompleteness
in the mathematics that describe our
world I I said mathematics just now as a
concession
to your
but what I meant is entirely a physical
thing
it it's a physical property of the world
which
um is responsible for the possibility of
life and then later uh presumably of
intelligence and creativity and
and science
and of the
um
limitlessness of science so so the the
illimitability of science is itself
let's put the other way around
if science was limited if there was a
feature of the universe that limits
science in the way that Hilbert wanted
to limit mathematics then there couldn't
have been any science in the first place
and this is another one of those
connections between emergent what we
call emergent properties and what we
call microscopic properties
uh I I would like to see a way of
formulating
um the laws of physics that doesn't
discriminate between microscopic and
emergent laws of physics a lot of the
the sort of
notorious problems we have like how to
define entropy and and the hour of time
and and so on I think are are just
because we insist that the microscope
the the world must be fundamentally made
of microscopic laws
um and uh uh so just to let you all know
constructive theory is is an attempt
to
um have a scale independent way of
describing laws
uh I think someone's raised a hand is
that okay
um so so you said that if there was
anything that limited uh science in the
universe if science was somehow if the
universe some are limited to the scope
of science then science science it
couldn't have gone starting in the first
place
um but I can imagine that
the observable universe is actually all
there is beyond the observable universe
there's no matter there's only there's
only space
um so there's nothing
to help design a form larger and larger
computations so at some point we reached
the limit of what we can do with
computers or something like that and uh
would that would still be consistent
with us having been able to do science
right now
and I was wondering if you think it's
wrong that maybe even if there's a role
without even beyond the observable
universe there's no matter you can still
have signs that progresses infinitely or
if there's another mistake or yeah I'm
curious about the response to that yeah
so I think that is wrong and and it's
for exactly the same reason that that I
was just saying
um if if we
characterize like all possible laws as
as being like like our world but it only
lasts uh a million years or like our
world but don't last a billion years or
then there are lots of possibilities
where uh it would look like our world
was was was uh
uh the the actual one and similarly for
mathematics you you could have a plot it
might be possible for proofs to to reach
up to a million steps but no more
because it so happened that the laws of
physics make all computers Decay after
they have performed a million steps and
and
um and so but
and there are many more of those worlds
than there are
what we think the actual world is with
no limits
and that is because that that's an
illustrator not because that that's an
illustration of the fact that
uh got to be so okay I won't say it's
because the Limitless one is simpler
because that would be falling into the
mathematician's misconception
but uh I want to say something like that
I want to say that the Limitless one is
a um
uh is a good explanation
in
high level terms
if you try to translate that into
low-level terms you'll get to to
variations of it which look like well it
only lasts a million years it only lasts
two million years and so on but
at the high level
variations of it are very difficult to
find because you'd have to say
okay proof is is limited by by what
that you would have to have some high
level thing that that can fit into the
language of
um talking about proofs and and uh
limits and
um
uh completeness and so on so the from
point of view physics these are all
high-level macroscopic con uh constructs
um
but I I think they are those are the
fundamental concepts
in which the laws of physics actually
are expressed
and because of that
we can say that insisting on describing
it all microscopically
is
um is perverse because it's much less
simple
but what we really mean is that there
are no good explanations along that
route
there's no words uh summarize I mean the
way I understand what you just said is
that this other explanation might well
be that in some sense it could mean that
the Universe ends above the variable
that the observable individuals all
there is but that would ruin other
explanations that we have like
experiences and how science Works yes
yeah and if you're going to settle for
that you might as well settle for
ferries at the bottom of the garden we
we need them to have embarked on this
great project of mathematics and physics
yes
thanks
um David would you relate the
incompleteness phenomenon in mathematics
with fallibilism in knowledge Creation
in general
it seems like you sort of invoked it
when you invoked life is that is that
the similar idea
yes it's again a similar idea and for
the same reason the that
um
um if the if there were so
if fallibleism were not true and there
were infallible ways of deriving
knowledge then when we have derived some
knowledge
it would never change and it it would be
true and the world would be finite of
the world would be a representation of
that finite piece of knowledge
and
um conversely the real situation is that
uh the world is infinitely amenable to
knowledge creation
and therefore
it must be
infinitely susceptible to errors which
however can be corrected but but nothing
is nothing is
uh nothing provides a firm foundation
not even and I repeat what I said
earlier not even logic not even the
rural logical rules of inference those
are all conjectures they we pick them
because they seem right because they
seem useful they seem fruitful but
who knows we we may found we may find
new ones and are you saying that there's
that there could be a a world in which
in which pie was rational
or square root of two say well of course
that's that's a fairly simple case
that all it would have to do is have a
different geometry from ours not not
euclidean geometry I mean Pi isn't Pi
isn't
um
instantiated in the universe anyway it's
an idealization
so if you actually measure a circle
you'll never get pi as the ratio between
the the radius and the and the between
the diameter and the circumference
well I was thinking of the mathematical
pie
well so
there are two different things one might
mean by the mathematical pi
physics allows us a certain window onto
the class of abstractions a tiny window
we can see some of them we can form
theories about some of them we can learn
about some of them and they include
euclidean geometry with its pi
that pie
cannot be changed by anyone like not
even God not even if we look out of a
different window
but if we did get out of a different
window thanks to having different laws
of physics or if the laws of physics
were not what we think they are but are
a bit different from what we think they
are as happened with euclidean geometry
and and general relativity then we won't
find pi out there in in the stuff we can
look at we can still
describe it
can describe pi and we can describe the
universe as it actually is which which
doesn't have pi
um and there there will be other ones
which we can't describe we can't
describe but they may they may have
people in them which can describe them
and then there'll be infinitely more
where there aren't people who can
describe anything
and yeah be careful to conclude that
therefore we don't exist
because that that is like the anthropic
principle misconception
uh
just because of misconceptions
well I would say the misapplication of
the anthropic principle these places
exist but there's nobody there to
complain about it no but you want to use
it to to
um deduce something about the world we
do see
and and I don't think the anthropic
principle is powerful enough to do that
because it will only it will the most it
can do yeah I agree
yeah I want to say something about on
the edge because you reminded me of that
and I don't want to show you a picture
is that okay now yeah sure go ahead okay
so uh I started worrying about this in
terms of uh the uh
the the boltzmann brain problem which
most of you are familiar with but here's
here's a sort of a a summary of it uh
the New York Times version she's from
Sean Carroll this was Boltzmann's idea
that the we we don't see it oh I have to
stay shared I see it I don't see why
okay uh that the the reason the universe
is out of equilibrium is is anthropic
that is that if the universe is infinite
and at equilibrium but we couldn't exist
in in one of these typical parts so
we're in an atypical part anthropically
selected but then uh somebody else I
think was Eddington said wait a minute
if that's true then we probably most
probably are in the smallest fluctuation
consistent with with uh our brain
existing and so the idea was that uh
of you would get something like this
where do I go to the next
screen here yeah
see if we go down here yes
yes
okay so people worried about
equilibration and we're in the 19th
century they called it the heat death of
the universe but they thought it was a
different problem for the distant future
but boltzmann or Eddington showed us a
problem in the present undermining our
ability to make inferences about
conditions in the past or elsewhere
because the inhabitants of any universe
that will eventually equilibrate uh
would have to make the additional
postulate that they're situated
atypically early in its history now that
gets into uh David's very nice uh
pointing out that from a Occam's razor
point of view a world that is just like
our worlds but ends in uh in a a second
from now or or a million years from now
has almost as simple a description
uh so anyway the broken prank problem
says that if world equilibrates then
almost all places that experience the
same phenomena that we have these are
illusory phenomena that that that that
are don't give grounds for scientific
inference so now there's this is a
little bit like the Doomsday problem
which which you can argue that uh
the the world that that has civilization
in it is has only existed for a very
short time compared to the time
available to it and why is we so
atypically early uh maybe it's because
Tech civilization is is intrinsically
unstable it'll destroy itself or maybe
there's something that I I think David
would like is Perpetual newness that is
maybe a billion years from now there
will still be people but they will be
preoccupied that some qualitatively new
feature of their existence which they
consider very important is so new and
they wonder why why they are so near the
beginning of uh of of infinity as David
would put it
uh uh so uh I would like to credit the
anthropic principle to schopenhauer who
really expressed it in the 19th century
1844 before Darwin
uh and here he says that uh
that the the world is is on the brink of
self-destruction and it's we should
expect to find it that way because uh of
this uh surface devonium argument in
high dimensional space that that David
made that is that if there are many
variables and all of them have to be
within a certain range for the world to
be habitable or for it to support life
or for it to support Universal
computation then with the highest
probability we're right near the edge
and only a little uh of very close to
self-destruction
and this is uh this is the is
schopenhauer's
he didn't put into mathematical terms
but if you did if he says we do not live
in the best of all possible worlds in
fact we live in very nearly the worst of
all possible worlds because if we
imagine goodness of a world depending on
many parameters here too uh and we we
just uh uh take everything to lowest
order uh and the goodness is a quadratic
function and the best of all possible
worlds is the maximum
uh and then we find that we're very
close to the edge so with uh with we're
probably right around the edge here and
therefore we should expect the world to
be in the brink of self-destruction as
it apparently is politically right now
uh and uh so that's uh we just have to
hope that it survives well that's that
that's my comment that I thought had to
do with what we were talking about
yeah again I advocate thinking in terms
of high level fundamental laws rather
than insisting how do you discover what
these high-level fundamental laws
because how do you say same well we
already have
yeah the same way that we discovered
low-level ones conjecture we have a
problem that we think might be soluble
by by postulating a law of nature
and the law of nature seems to answer
that problem and many other problems and
so if it doesn't then we we haven't
solved the problem yet uh and the more
it does uh the the the the more problems
it exposes which we then sold and so on
now we're we're doing this at many
levels already I mean there are there
are people who have deep theories about
what it takes to win a war and what it
takes to make a stable society and what
it takes to cure depression and so on
it's just that we have a culture that
stigmatizes those
from the point of view of being
fundamental so we only expect such
knowledge to extend to
our own Planet our own time our own
species
if that you know we we don't have we
don't uh think of them as being
fundamental but some of them like the
law of the existence of universal
computation
is is and the law of increase of entropy
for that matter
um they they are
um from a practical point of view
we do regard them as fundamental like as
Eddington or someone said uh you know
somebody tells you that the the the
first law of thermodynamics is wrong
then so much so much about so much the
words for the theory but if they if they
say the second law is wrong then they
must retire in deep humiliation and so
on so so we do we do actually have
confidence in high level laws it's just
that we have a culture that tells us
that those can't be fundamental we can't
kind of infer things about the universe
and the big bang and the long-term
survival of the Universe
um and and and
um
uh bits of the universe that we can't
see
uh this sort of consideration is you
know is considered it's considered
ludicrous to try to talk about that from
using Concepts like
knowledge
and even computation and information and
and so on oh
information actually is a bit of an
exception because thanks to the
mathematician's misconception people are
inclined to think that information is
fundamental and everything might be made
of bits
but uh yes so
um so you like from it rather than it
putting it from bit
sorry you you like bit from it rather
than yeah yeah yeah absolutely
um yeah so this is very much land hours
uh you you you probably sympathize with
what he said
about this uh um information is physical
oh yeah well of course I I thought we
all did I I thought
that's that's his great contribution
wheelers see wheeler put it the other
way he says physics is informational
yeah well that's a misconception that
that obviously can't be right the the
you know that that's it's the same same
thing as expecting us to be in a
simulation and the aliens uh simulating
us on a giant computer and for some
reason people think that that computer
has got to be a turing machine
that's simply a non-sequitur it's it's
it's just a parochial
um
uh forcing of a human concept onto
imaginary superhuman aliens
um you mean you think it might be a a a
a a machine at the higher level of the
hierarchy which could solve the halting
problem and then was worrying about
harder things yes although call it
calling it higher level
that's from Halloween they clean the
hierarchy yeah yeah which is again
expressed from our point of view it
could just have different fundamental
um States and different fundamental
operations so one of its fundamental
operations might be
to solve the halting problem not not
um very slowly like like you're in
envisaging but instantly so you could
ask it questions about Turing machines
and it could answer all such questions
instantly on the other hand
um adding two and two uh would have it
scratching its head for a million years
probably like workers right
I I haven't read it actually
oh it's full of things like that about
about a guy who remembers everything and
and uh
and is is is
uh Paralyzed by that and about uh oh
right
well you know you you can't deny that in
the set of all mathematical objects such
things exist and therefore it is
logically possible that
physics conforms to that object rather
than the objects we think it conforms to
okay I I admit that I think I'm going to
just disagree with you in a way that we
can't prove very easily because Turing
is dead uh that uh he would have
sympathized more with with my view that
that all the different parts of physics
including the parts of the universe we
can't get to because they're beyond the
Hubble distance uh would be simulable by
a turing machine and and wouldn't
involve uh these higher level things but
seriously physicists like remember uh
hartle uh Garrosh and harle wrote a
paper about what would an uncomputable
number look like if it was a physical
constant
and I think that's certainly a
legitimate question and you're saying
that those things uh that
that one aspect of the mathematician's
uh dysphemism is that it uh is that that
they assume that such things don't exist
yes yes when applied to physics yes
and I think David was also invoking not
just beyond the Hubble distance but also
in a pure in a completely different
universe
yeah well that's what String Theory
gives us as far as I understand Andrea
is that there's there are things where I
guess it's consistent with with Quantum
field Theory and general relativity but
things that are just extremely different
from from anything that that we easily
imagine yeah but that that's yeah you
don't even need String Theory I would
say the development of theoretical
physics keeps pulling us
in that direction and it's hard to
truncate
I I don't know if it's
you know right but but but the you mean
yeah even uncomputable things could be
there
I I don't think that way so I don't know
how to how to answer that but I these
these I mean I think one of the
fascinating things about cosmology is
that
physicists pride ourselves in this
culture of we only talk about real stuff
we can touch and measure but cosmology
really
really disrupts that it's really hard to
to write down theories with the laws we
have with with the tools we have that
allow us to limit ourselves that way
um maybe and I I'm actually really
intrigued by David Zango which seems to
be um
to take that as a judgment of the our
ideas about physical laws if if I
understand that which I find fascinating
I've I come at I've come at a lot of
these ideas from the point of view that
physic physics has nothing to do with
infinity because you only ever collect
finite data and you're you you will only
ever shape
um
the
what you're the only stuff you have to
work with is finite
in terms of having finite data and so on
and what I'm hearing
I'm very directly from David and I think
implicitly or maybe directly to from
Charlie anyway I'm hearing in both your
comments that the problem of the arrow
of time or the problem of bolts and
brains or however you want to put it is
looming enough
to transcend the the that's forcing us
away from that position that that
um position making us love Infinity yeah
and and I I'm I just I I will say that
whatever
wherever I am in my prejudices and all
that with that I I think that that
problem looms so mightily that that I
that I I have to respect even though
you're you're doing stuff I've that I
find uncomfortable
that problem looms so mightily that it
I'm
I respect
yeah it's it's very radical to to me
it's very radical what you're trying to
do but something has to give
um Oscar Wilde said we're all in the
gutter but some of us are looking at the
stars
well some of us are looking at Infinity
because it solves problems here and now
but it seems to me like a cheat that's I
think that's so I think you're also
giving up so so and I think you're
explicitly saying that you're giving up
on the um standard ways we think about
doing physics
and and whether it's embracing some
beautiful better thing or giving up is a
little hard for me to tell we've
embraced the Continuum for centuries
yeah just just a derivative that we do
in classes yes but it doesn't work but
not for okay but but
that's only to make our life easier and
if it were discreet instead it wouldn't
it wouldn't it wouldn't change it it
wouldn't be a radical thing to put it on
a lattice we're not here to make our
lives easier we're here to understand
the world and that's why these
continuums and and uh derivatives and
all that infinite stuff was invented was
conjectured and it might be false but it
might not be we shouldn't have
prejudices about these things
but
but our our
yes that's fine I I I like your line I I
find the um I I find the finiteness of
the
of physics the physics is finite except
you're saying I what I'm hearing is
okay physics might be finite but except
for the arrow of Time problem forcing us
out I don't think the Continuum forces
us to Infinity we can have a lattice we
can have all kinds of things that do
just fine but you're saying this is the
one thing that forces us to think about
Infinity
which is intriguing
I'd like to go in the audience and give
give the chance for some students to ask
questions if any one of you have a
question
hi I'm not sure whether I understood
whether I understood why uh
incompleteness is fundamental for
non-equilibrium phenomena and so for
life I think it was a point of the Habit
as he made before yeah
so I'd like um
maybe more comments about that
no thank you cool thanks
David would you like to react
I'm sure Charlie could do this better
but but I I
uh the the connection is that if you
have to look at the contrapositive
if
um there is a limitation
such as Hilbert imagined
um
that you you can write out uh an
algorithm that will
be a Criterion of Truth
then mathematics has stopped at that
point
and the same would be true of physics if
uh if if uh there was a knowable law of
physics that predicted everything then
that would be the end of physics
and
if there were such a thing as life in a
universe which I think there couldn't be
but if if there were then it would
really mean that the design of
the most complicated creature that could
exist which would be finitely
complicated would exist
baked into the to the laws of physics at
the Big Bang
so
you know the the universe would not have
any of the kinds of openness explain the
complexity and all the high level
structure
um if
if
um it were not if if there were
infallible
truths available
uh put that the other way around unless
their availability
so
Charlie yeah yeah I think that's right
that that is that uh
if if you didn't have
it's because uh uh
incompleteness is the flip side of
universality if you had a a if you're
restricted
uh the the laws of nature to to uh
something in which you couldn't produce
a a a a a universal computer of course
but it would be limited by
how long it could run before but
basically something that was behaving
like a touring machine until some some
part broke uh then you couldn't get
something as complicated as as a
uh
a bacterium
thanks
are there any other questions from the
audience
yeah Vincent would you like to come
foreign
so hello thank you so much for the great
discussion maybe I have a question about
a bit of a different topic name about
um artificial intelligence and AGI maybe
because some of us are interested in
this
um so from the
um touring Church thesis we know that
our brains are not doing anything
magical they could be assimilated by a
tutoring machine right
um so that means in principle some we
could Implement something like AGI if
you if we would know how
um but it could be that the only way at
least in in my view the only way to
implement this is to simulate something
like a human brain on a train machine
not that there's any simple AGI program
that does something like human level
intelligence or creativity or maybe
there is any reason
um
we might get there or do you think there
is any reason that we should expect a
simple program that implements AGI or is
do we have to take the detour to
simulate something like a human brain
and this then I think well creativity
human brain might be simple looked at
the right way I I I I think uh simple
doesn't necessarily mean easy to find
I think there is a very strong reason to
believe that the uh
explanatory universality property of the
human brain which uh the present only
humans have
uh must be encoded in a very short
amount of DNA
a tiny amount like we i i people have
different numbers for this but you know
we seem to be
um 95 or 99 of our DNA is the same as
chimpanzees and of the rest a lot is
junk DNA and of the rest a lot is
um differences between us and
chimpanzees that that aren't connected
with
um with these deep epistemological
things so so maybe it's only a few K of
code in in in DNA terms that encodes the
agiinus or the ginus of the brain
but that doesn't mean it's easy to find
I I would I would guess that it is a
short program I mean you know
few cave program is actually long if you
want to write it but but uh it's it's
relatively short compared with the kinds
of things that happen in biology
um and I think it'll be very hard to
find
and probably well I would expect us to
find it only once we have
uh understood a philosophical theory of
what the function is what the uh
creativity Consciousness qualia and so
on what what those things are in in some
precise terms precise but but high level
I would expect and then then we can
probably quite easily write a program
that has that property
then we'll be in various kinds of
trouble but not any of the kinds of
trouble that people are thinking about
now
I worry that people who who know more
about it are scared about it but uh
people are so
uh
so good at being cruel to each other
with their intelligence that uh
I doubt that the machines that do much
worse
of
and it I take this uh
schopenhauer's principle which is what
they should call the anthropic principle
pretty seriously and it may be that
we're uh
not likely to last more than uh a few or
decades before of
we I don't think this human civilization
will extinct itself but white set us
back you know if
few centuries or Millennia uh
and we just to hope for the best but uh
so
yeah so that's why I don't don't worry
about it so much uh
but maybe I should
oh I know it's it's also if you're if
you want to be a universal not in the
sense of computational universality but
in the if the sense of the universal
Declaration of Human Rights
where do we get off thinking that we're
with that we have better rights than
these machines they might they might
actually do a better job or they might
be our our
successors not in the sense of of
the ones that uh conquered us and and
enslaved us
but in the in the way that provided a
shortcut to what maybe uh
what to the to the
the bad instincts or let's say the
maladaptive instincts that humans have
and that that it might take a bit of of
uh of
very unpleasant
uh
natural selection to get rid of
and maybe the artificial intelligence
would get make a shorter shortcut to so
you're saying yeah might be better
people
yeah yeah in other words another way of
doing it would be giving us a transplant
of bonobo genes or something that just
makes us you know more susceptible to
taking it easy and less susceptible to
getting angry at our neighbors for
because of misinformation we've heard
about them and going out and killing
them
uh which which seems to be the the
tendency people have which probably was
very adaptive at one stage but is is not
helping us right now
thanks you don't believe that in the
better angels of our nature and Stephen
Pinker and all that stuff
uh you know he says we've been getting
better and better and it look if if if
civilization there's there's that's
tendency but there are also strong
tendencies in the other direction you
know we saw in the in the 20th century
it got pretty bad and and it it could do
so again or you know and and it's worse
now because the because the reach of of
things is is even more Global than it
was in the 20th century so a very
impressive world government would would
uh would have be harder to dislodge
um
there's a more fundamental reason why
why you're right namely because of
fallibilism there can be no upper bound
to the size of error we can make
so although yes
we we have the potential to to uh go
exponentially into the future add
infinitum we have the potential to make
arbitrarily large errors and we may have
a dark age and another Dark Age and a
Dark Age lasting a million years or we
may wipe ourselves out and something
else might evolve somewhere else in the
universe or somewhere else in the
Multiverse and there can be no guarantee
that that won't happen there can be no
even
there can be no guarantee that it
probably won't happen
so
um what we have to do is solve problems
as we find them and create knowledge as
we can
and not rely on Supernatural guarantees
I thought you'd like that point about
the finite balance
are there any other questions from the
audience
editor
I'm changing chairs depending on which
side people come
hi so I had a question because a lot of
this discussion we spent about
discussing about uh how uh
undecidability and the halting problem
are I guess flip sides of the same
problem would you also say that
universality oh sorry yeah universality
and the and the whole thing problem are
the kind of opposite sides of the same
problem would you also say that these
are
opposite sides of induction and
deduction as ways to kind of acquire
knowledge because we talked about
I guess Solomon of induction a little
bit in the beginning and how maybe how
maybe that is like one conceptualization
of you how you could derive Knowledge
from from instead of like using
deduction from a formal set of axioms
where you would use data instead so
would you say that the incomputability
of
something like ideal induction is is the
same as not being able to deduce because
of
incompleteness yes yes they they are
both impossible for the same reason
and their impossibility is a very good
thing for the same reason
so in in both cases instead of deriving
things we have to guess things we have
to conjecture and the conjectures are
always fallible
and I I'm I'm spouting Papa's philosophy
here so you know that that's that's
where you have to go for this and he he
um
he got an amazing number of things right
working almost in isolation
to link to relate with editor's point I
think also solomonov's induction is is
an idealization and it to have filament
of metric one needs to solve the halting
problem right but in concrete
applications one cannot find you know
Solomon of sprayer and so what we do
what people we can as we as you know
upper semi-computed perhaps
and then
come up with guesses or maybe this
phenomenon from which I got these data
has been explained by this program now
everything is programs but and one can
come up with this
that's actually that's that's also a
problem how we link scientific
explanations with programs but I think
there is a a bit of a
of a papyrian flavor in Solomon of
induction once we realize that it's
uncomputable so forget it it's a
beautiful idea it does converge to
whatever it needs to converge but the
fact that it's uncomputable we can only
guess programs the thing is usually or
often shall I say often the problem
we're trying to solve isn't in data we
haven't yet got any data so sometimes
it's a theoretical problem like how how
is it possible for for uh Maxwell's
equations to be true and uh geometry to
be what we think it is there's no data
no data at all so you have this problem
first then the theory then the data
and so induction of any kind simply
can't exist
in in that kind of a reality
and as as I keep saying it's a very good
thing that it can't
so solomonov is solving trying to solve
a problem that isn't there is trying to
say you know how how can we make this
induction or this Bayesian inference or
whatever makes sense
uh how can we get the priors right well
the priors aren't right
get over it
yeah
well my uh colleague John smolen told me
about the story of induction
and about an explorer who comes to a a
place that's inhabited by
anti-inductionists
and these are people who believe that if
if something happened once it's less
likely to happen again
and they have uh a miserable life
because uh their their buildings fall
down and their crops fail
and so this Explorer says you know I
understand why everything is not working
here it's because your your principle of
anti-induction
uh is is wrong and they looked at him
and he said why should we give off this
principle it's never worked before
nice
right
good uh thank you thank you so much for
your answers
other questions
Sam
um
I'm interested in what kinds of
Technology Charlie is interested in
because I mean we have the uh there was
a
for people like Victor
um this virus cosmology
has been trying to get them again and
I'm just curious what what interesting
at the moment well I don't know a lot
about it but I've been trying to to
understand uh these models they call
Eternal inflation where there isn't a
beginning that or an end uh but in which
there's a
inflating Pockets that he appear here
and there with all sorts of different
natural laws in them and in that uh
Frank that's a pretty scary place to to
live and it's it's it's populated by all
kinds of problems like David mentioned
that uh the the
it's hard to get a universe in which
you're not extremely likely to disappear
in in a microsecond from now
um
other questions from the group
if they come up later be free to feel
free to raise your hand at some point
and at this stage I could also take
questions from the
from the online event I would have a
quick question
cool
go ahead Sophie
um
wondering when you're talking about
other universes that would have maybe
uh they they could solve the all-time
problem and for them it's pretty easy
but for us it's difficult and vice versa
for other tasks
are you thinking about
other branches in the Multiverse or
something that would be completely
outside of what we are studying now the
latter in the Multiverse there there's
there's no uh all the universe is in the
quantum Multiverse
have the same tame mathematics they even
have the same computable functions
um they just have different complexity
Theory but complexity Theory isn't that
important anyway
so yeah but but uh we have to we have to
um consider
universes with different laws if only to
to examine explanations like the
anthropic principle
which purport to explain things in our
universe
and only only certain very special kinds
of anthropic argument
um constitute arguments they they're
otherwise they they simply fall victim
to this uh boltzmann brain or or
boundary of the of the set of
possibilities problem
um
uh Dennis Sharma when he was uh when he
told us about this objection
he said that what we should really look
for
anthropically is for is a case not not a
case where a slight change in a
fundamental law would have meant that
we're not here but where the but where
we are located at the center of the
region let's say
um Define structure constant rather than
saying you know if it was one percent
different uh
uh we wouldn't be here look at the
region
uh where we would be here and and try to
find out whether we're near the center
if we're near the center
that that is a real anthropic problem
that you know if you tell this to
religious people they're going to say
it's God and it's very hard to argue
them out of it
but I don't think we will be in the
center
but I think you don't think we're also
on the edges because if we're on the
edges we're out of it right after yeah
where we're neither at the center of the
edges because that's not where the
explanation lies the explanation of the
actual values doesn't doesn't lie in our
existence
it's it's a common cause is caused by
things like
the law of the of the universality of
computation
I was about to say a side effect yeah
yeah
thank you
are there other questions we're not at
the middle and we're not at the edge
exactly how far from The Edge are we
probably a non-computable amount
or an intractably computable amount
David I'm just curious this is a small
question but I'm just curious so your
comments about
the the sort of unpredictability of a
future of our civilization and the
possibility of
our demise
is that is that the same thing as this
Edge that we've been talking about
do you see a difference uh yeah yeah it
was almost the opposite it's it's the
it's to do with our fallibility which is
to do with our capacity for infinite
growth
good okay that's that's interesting yeah
so it's it's
Our Hope as well as our possible demise
well you know I'm not expecting our
possible demise I I I think you know
arguing that there will be a dis demise
is itself not legitimate that's a
prophecy that's perfect but but it's in
the scope but but it's it's not that
you're you're saying we can't
be sure to avoid it yeah it's it it's um
the future of knowledge is unknowable
again we've got to get over that it's
it's a fact right right yeah that's
you're saying unlike other uh
predictions it's not falsifiable because
if if the if there is a demise uh
it's like I think Jill brassar was wrote
a book on on
uh clearing computation in which it had
a cartoon of us a bunch of elderly
scientists
looking into a steaming test tube and
one of them is saying
uh we may have discovered the elixir of
immortality but it will take forever to
test it
[Music]
any more questions
I have another question maybe for
Charles
um I wonder what's your view of
probabilities
um
my view of probability yep
I think it's just uh I I think it arises
from uh
entanglement
yes right that is the uh the uh
probabilism is a is the feature of a
subsystem uh in in a uh
in a larger system that that uh evolves
uh unitarily
cool my question would also could also
be formulated as do you agree with David
in terms of what our probabilities and I
guess the answer is yes
not necessarily because many people view
probabilities as entanglement because
they understand quantum theory as
unitary and so entanglement is out there
but even even among these people there's
still many disagreements about how we
should read the born rule
and so so maybe the follow-up question
for Charlie without without being so
specific as does it equate to David's
despite you embracing it every quantum
theory still how do you view the born
rule
yeah it's it's uh it's hard I I I try
not to think about it but I know
David do you have an answer on that
um
yes I think I I think the decision
Theory approach to
um probability in quantum mechanics is
correct and sufficient and uh
whether you whether you call that
deriving the born rule I don't know I
think the bowling rule is a is not a
universal rule obviously because it
doesn't apply to Quantum Theory
I mean it it only applies to Quantum
Theory at a tiny minority of of in a
tiny minority of situations
um in those situations modeling the the
situation with decision Theory
the decision Theory theoretic approach
if I can say very quickly is to take
decision classical decision Theory and
quantum theory strip out all the
probability from classical decision
Theory so strip out all the
probabilistic axioms and so on and then
quantum theory strip out the
probabilistic you know if you're going
to have wave function collapse or
something strip out all that stuff
anything that's supposed to be
probabilistic then
smush them together
and you get
consistent
quantum theory namely everetts and you
get a consistent theory of probability
which only applies when people are
making decisions
and the the rule that they use assuming
that they make measurements accurately
and all that stuff in that approximation
their rational Behavior as determined by
decision Theory
uh is the same as it would be if they
believed in stochastic processes even
though stochastic processes do not
happen in nature
yeah that sounds pretty plausible
oh
I'm not sure I properly understood your
explanation David because if you say you
want to get rid of the bone Rule and you
believe in a unitary Quinta mechanics
and and the average many worlds
interpretation
how do you reconcile the fact that when
we do a Quantum experiment in the lab we
you know we just get to see one result
how do we
how do we interpret the fact that we're
in just a specific branch of the
Multiverse and say not another one we're
not we're in all of them and the fact
that we see only one outcome is a
prediction of quantum theory if you if
you just write the equation for with the
variable for how many outcomes do we see
then you will find that the world after
after a good measurement the world will
be in an eigen state of that with
eigenvalue one
okay so it actually happens is that all
of the outcomes happen I mean
generically
but the the question was about
probability what do we then mean that
some of them have a high prior
probability than others given that they
all happen
then you have to bring in another
part of the model which is suppose we
were betting on these outcomes how would
it be rational to bet
and decision Theory
without probabilistic axioms and Quantum
Theory without them together give the
answer
It's Magic
you're shaking your head but if you read
the papers it's it's I think it's
unanswerable
I mean it's it's uh undeniable do you
think it's unanswerable or just we we
haven't saw a good explanation for it
yes
is too ambiguous a word I mean it's so
deniable that this is the explanation so
David has
amidst his other
euphemisms and dysphemisms brought in
what is I regard the the the most
widespread
uh
a fuscatory euphemism God that is
people
people use it to mean their own idea of
God which they're going to try to get
you to like and believe in but but they
haven't actually said what it is yet
uh so I'm going to use that also but in
a physicist sway
so if you imagine a conversation with
god and uh and first of all you say what
time is it and God says well you would
say it's it's about uh here since it's
about uh
uh it's about 10 37 eastern Daylight
Time
but and for me it's all times I'm
eternal
and then you'll say well you're supposed
to be omniscient uh
will it rain a year from now
and God says well that's like
yes and no
and you would say well will it rain for
me from now well I say it's like saying
what I see is is
something that looks like your hand
and you're sitting here and you're
saying
which of my fingers is the correct
extension of my wrist
they all are when it gets to be next
year you'll either be on one where it's
rainy which is the one that has my
wedding ring or you'll be one of the
other ones where it isn't raining
and I can see all of them but but
and and you for you now they're all
equally real and then in in a next year
you will have a kind of uh uh a
a truncated perspective in which you
think one of them is real and the others
aren't but they all still are
I'm not going to think that I know that
the other branches exist even if I can't
see them most things in the universe I
can't see
I don't know why that's so so
um this this is a lot it's like this
what Galileo said he says it I don't
know if he actually said this but he
says that it's uh uh yes I say that the
Earth moves and if it moves the way I
say it is you shouldn't be able to feel
it moving so shut up yeah pretty much
yeah
Everett said that to do it yes yeah so
yeah did he use the Galileo example yes
absolutely yeah yeah that's right that's
where it came and is that the moment
where they would started to say okay I
don't know what more to argue against
yeah that's the moment he was convinced
yeah
so so the idea is even the theory says
yes you will only Experience One outcome
yes so even though we seem to be bugged
by the fact that no but the theory says
there's going to be many outcomes no no
it it might look like the theory says
there's going to be many outcomes but if
if each of if you ask yourself what how
many outcomes am I going to see the
theory says systematically only one
so it preserves its consistency in spite
of its striking
apparent inconsistency
um
are there other questions
hey uh
yeah so uh so will you would you say
well any of you say that in that sense
in the since we just discussed now the
born principle will be a statement about
consciousness
of
what do you experience
or do you think it's beyond like
Consciousness would be on the scope of
the statement
uh it has nothing to do with it it's I
mean obviously
if consciousness
is to be described as a physical process
which it must be then it presumably
obeys quantum theory and so on but it
has nothing to do with these issues of
um measurement
um probability and and anything like
that it's it's just a physical thing
there's there's no more
reason to assume it has a special place
in physics than it would be to assume
that squirrels have a special place in
physics
obviously they're described by physics
but they don't have any relevance to
fundamental discussions of physics
well I asked before because the the idea
was like I mean the the fondant if I'm
following the discussion is that like
you have this different potential
outcomes of measurement all of them
occur all of them have their own
branches and all of them are there but
the statement is more like the one you
you will experience one of them but and
then it's if it's about you will
experience one of them you will see one
of them is will indeed addressing
directly the consciousness of or or
maybe I'm just like going out
the same question can be asked about
um a a seed of a plant that that grows
into two trees uh the left one and the
right one and you ask the seed are you
going to be the left one or the right
one or or twins you know are you going
to be Joe or Fred
you ask the the fertilized egg and it
says to you well in a sense I'm going to
be both of them in a sense I'm only
going to be one of them
you know that is to say I will not
experience being both them
but the experience of being each of them
will both happen
okay I see I understand
that's a good way of quitting it yeah
well
David and Charlie have been tremendously
generous of their time and it doesn't
seems like there's other questions if
somebody has a burning desire and has
been repressing his question this is the
last call
it also applies for the audience
great
so thank you so much David and Charlie
that was a lot of fun to discuss with
you and
it was a and yeah very very fascinating
in many regards
thank you very much very very
interesting conversation
thank you hi everyone
thanks a lot this was great bye-bye